Overview
Authentication is a fundamental security measure, verifying user identity and allowing you to lock down what a user can see and do correctly. Biometric\[[1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biometrics)] authentication leverages the unique physical and behavioral traits of users (fingerprints, facial structure, voice patterns, and more) to verify their identity. Each individual's biometric data is inherently distinctive, making it difficult for attackers to gain unauthorized access.
Beyond being a higher security approach, biometric authentication is convenient for users. With this, they can skip the hassle of remembering and typing in long [passwords](/securebydesign/authn-using-passwords/) or retrieving a one-time code from [email](/securebydesign/authn-using-trx-otp/), [SMS](/securebydesign/authn-using-trx-otp/), or [an app](/securebydesign/authn-using-totp/). Instead, they can simply scan their fingerprint or face to log in.
Use of biometrics for authentication
Biometrics can be used as a standalone authentication mechanism (e.g., for phone unlocks), as a [second authentication factor](/securebydesign/authn-intro/#mfa-and-2fa) (e.g., to supplement password authentication), or as part of a protocol such as [WebAuthn](/securebydesign/authn-using-webauthn/) or [FIDO passkeys](/securebydesign/authn-using-passkeys/) where it provides user verification. In the context of [multi-factor authentication (MFA)](/securebydesign/authn-intro/#mfa-and-2fa), biometrics serve as a “something you are” authentication factor.
Some mobile apps allow the use of biometrics through facilities such as Face ID as convenience as an alternative to the user entering a PIN or password. Unlike with the MFA case, this does not increase security since attackers can continue to use a PIN or password if that makes it easier for them to pass authentication; if the biometric authentication was somehow easier for them to pass, then adding that as an option actually lowered the security bar.
How biometric authentication works
The following entities participate in biometric authentication:

- The user: The individual who is trying to authenticate themselves by providing their biometric data.
- The capture device: The device that captures a _biometric sample_ from the user. Examples include fingerprint scanners, cameras, and microphones.
- The biometric matcher: The software that compares the user's biometric sample to the stored reference data. This can be done on the client or the server.
- The authentication server: This software makes the final decision about whether or not to authenticate the user.
  During biometric matching, the captured biometric sample is processed to extract distinctive features unique to the individual. For example, in the case of a fingerprint, ridge patterns are extracted; for facial recognition, key facial landmarks are identified. During biometric enrollment, the extracted features are used to create a unique but efficient digital representation called a _biometric template_. That becomes linked to the user’s account.
  When the user later attempts to access the system or application, they provide their biometric data again using the capture device. Features are again extracted in the matcher and comparisons are made to the template and the strength of the match is evaluated. The authentication server evaluates the results from the matcher and possibly leverages other indicators. Based on the authentication result, authorization decisions are made, e.g., if the user can access a particular user account or perform a funds transfer.
  This diagram depicts the authentication process visually:

Benefits to using biometric authentication
Employing biometric authentication for app authentication can improve security, compliance, user experience, fraud rates, app trustworthiness, and more:

- Potentially increased security and compliance: Unlike passwords that can be guessed or stolen and even physical security keys, biometric traits are personal and non-transferable, significantly reducing the chances of breaches. Increased security helps have fuller adherence to compliance standards, which is relevant in many industries.
- Improved convenience: Biometric authentication makes it more convenient for users to use your app, with less to remember and with easier authentication input. This can foster greater user satisfaction.
- Reduced fraud and increased trustworthiness: Biometric authentication can help to reduce fraud by making it more difficult for attackers to gain unauthorized access to online services. Biometric data is resistant to common fraud methods such as phishing and keylogging. Stronger authentication makes your app more trustworthy due to stronger safeguards on user actions and will inspire greater confidence in your app.
- Availability: Most modern devices are equipped with biometric sensors.
  Considerations for employing biometric authentication
  Be sure to take the following into account when adopting biometrics for your app:
- Privacy and user acceptance: Biometric data is highly personal and sensitive. Users may be concerned about this being compromised from your app’s storage or about being tracked or individually identified even if they are trying to be relatively anonymous. Biometrics disclosed by one site may facilitate unauthorized access to an unrelated site. Be sure to secure their data and make your usage policies clear.
- Attacks: Attacks on biometric authentication are covered in the [following section](#attacks-and-countermeasures).
- Cost and implementation complexity: Carefully evaluate the full cost of implementing biometric authentication. Biometric authentication can also be complex to set up and manage\[[2](https://www.onelogin.com/learn/biometric-authentication)].
- Varying biometric sensors: If your user population has a range of devices, you may need to support multiple kinds of biometrics and work with the differences in the biometric readers.
- Support for fallback options: Biometric authentication may require backup methods in case of device malfunctions or when genuine users’ biometrics are not currently succeeding; this can add complexity and could provide alternative avenues of attack. Relatedly, in contrast to other authentication approaches, biometrics are not replaceable – people cannot just change their fingerprints if they become disclosed; built-in cancelability\[[3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biometrics#Cancelable_biometrics)] can help mitigate this.
- Regulatory compliance: Some regions have strict regulations governing the collection and storage of biometric data that need to be adhered to\[[4](https://pro.bloomberglaw.com/brief/biometric-data-privacy-laws/)].
  Attacks and countermeasures
  Biometric-based authentication approaches can be very secure, but they are not foolproof. Attacks on this form of authentication include\[[5](https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/biometrics/how-biometrics-are-attacked)]:
- Presentation attacks: Here, attackers present a fake biometric sample to the sensor. For example, an attacker could use a phony fingerprint, a mask of someone's face, or a voice recording. Countermeasures include using anti-spoofing techniques, such as 3D imaging and liveness detection.
- Digital replay attacks: These attacks involve replaying a previously captured biometric sample from the actual user. An attacker could, for example, replay the digital version of someone's fingerprint to gain access to the system. Countermeasures include using encryption to protect biometric data in transit and storage and having a particular sample only acceptable for a short period.
- Template attacks: These attacks involve stealing or modifying the biometric template. For example, an attacker could hack into the database and steal the biometric templates of all the users. They could also insert a template that they can match. Countermeasures include using strong encryption to protect biometric templates and keeping the database secured.
  Security can be increased as needed by supplementing authentication with additional signals such as geolocation or additional biometrics (even, say, enrolling a second fingerprint).
  Biometric approaches for app authentication and comparison
  The specific biometrics that are currently most relevant for app authentication are fingerprint recognition, facial recognition, and voice recognition; we compare those below. Iris appearance, retina veins, and palm prints are also used for authentication for some circumstances, but not typically for cloud apps. Hand geometry, hand vein appearance, and other types of body appearance readings might be used for login at some future point. Biometric approaches that have been researched or employed that are based on movement (e.g., walking gait), user behavior (e.g., mousing dynamics), or that are slow (e.g., DNA matching) seem generally less well suited for use at the time of login.
  This table highlights some key differences between the three approaches:
  Best practices
  These best practices will keep your app more secure and help you and your customers have a smooth experience with biometric authentication:
- Use a biometric authentication solution that is secure and reliable.
  - Unless you are specialized in biometric matching, do not attempt to implement this yourself; you are likely to have reliability issues and unknowingly be susceptible to attacks.
  - Test the solution yourself to ensure it works reliably and isn’t easily fooled, or leverage impartial experts to do so.
  - Protect against presentation attacks through advanced techniques such as liveness detection.
- Safeguard biometric templates\[[2](https://www.onelogin.com/learn/biometric-authentication)]. It is crucial to store the templates securely and restrict access to them. Without this you can quickly have many unhappy users, widespread unauthorized access, and damaged trust.
- Use high-quality biometric input devices where possible.
- Obtain and use multiple biometrics samples from a user to promote greater reliability.
- Be sure to fully evaluate what single or combination of [authentication approaches](/securebydesign/authn-intro/) satisfies your security requirements and design fallback approaches that maintain the needed level of security.
- Ensure that your biometric authentication can’t be bypassed through coverage gaps, logic flaws, or digital replay attacks, bearing in mind to not blindly trust the client\[[6](https://security.stackexchange.com/questions/105389/dont-trust-the-client),[7](https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/603.html)].
- Keep your app secure – keep biometric systems up-to-date with the latest security patches and improvements and monitor the system for signs of attack such as failed authentication or suspicious access. Advances in artificial intelligence (AI) should drive better biometrics matching but may also allow attackers to perform more sophisticated attacks, so stay up to date.
- Obtain explicit user consent for collecting and using biometric data. Communicate your data handling practices and adhere to relevant privacy regulations.
