OIDC and social login
OpenID Connect\[[1](https://openid.net/developers/discover-openid-and-openid-connect/)] (OIDC) is a prevalent, standardized, and modern protocol used to securely verify a user’s identity for online services. Since [authentication](/securebydesign/authn-intro/) is a fundamental security measure, it is essential for these services to correctly identify their users; OIDC provides a means to achieve this. OIDC relies on a trusted identity provider (_OIDC provider_ or _IdP_), allowing applications (_clients_) to delegate user authentication to the IdP while focusing on their core functionality.
OIDC was developed by the OpenID\[[2](https://openid.net/)] open-source standards body and is built on OAuth 2.0\[[3](https://oauth.net/2/)]. OAuth 2.0 is mainly concerned with authorization and resource access control but does not specialize in user authentication; this makes OIDC and OAuth 2.0 complimentary.
The IdP shares limited information about the user, and what may be shared is disclosed at the time the user agrees to allow the IdP to authenticate themselves to the app. Apps never see the user’s IdP passwords or other sensitive authentication information and cannot act as that user on the IdP.
Social login
Identity providers are commonly large websites with millions of users. Historically these providers were mostly social media providers such as Facebook, so this approach is commonly called _social login_. The term, however, is somewhat misleading because there is no social element involved in the authentication process, and not all IdPs (for example, Google) are social media companies. OIDC is the most popular form of social login.
An app can utilize social login as a means of authentication. Users will find it convenient to not need to set up login (e.g., username/password) with yet another online service and will not need to trust the app to securely store their credentials. Users will often already have an existing account with at least one IdP supported by the app and the app will benefit in the form of increased engagement from the user’s reduced registration and login friction. Apps can choose which specific IdPs to support authentication with, reflecting on their target audience. Social login can be combined with additional authentication steps such as [MFA](/securebydesign/authn-intro/#mfa-and-2fa). Apps may also provide non-social authentication options for users who do not want to use any of the provided IdPs for login.
Social login compared to SSO
Both social login and [single sign-on (SSO)](/securebydesign/authn-using-saml2/) involve users authenticating to an application through a third party. SSO is an initiative typically undertaken by organizations, such as businesses or schools, intending to set  up a unified authentication provider. This provider is then used by internal users to access all the online systems provided by the organization. In essence, it is a one-stop authentication solution for multiple services. Enterprise SSO frequently relies on [SAML2](/securebydesign/authn-using-saml2/) for implementation.
In contrast, social login is established at the level of an individual online service and is often not the only supported authentication approach. As a result of this ad hoc establishment, consumers frequently find themselves using a variety of providers for different services and not using external authentication at all for other services.
Wading into OIDC
Security tokens
OIDC provides a means for your app to reliably establish a user’s identity without the app itself needing to handle user credentials. The result of successful OIDC authentication is two security tokens your app can use:

1.  The _identity token_ attests to the user’s identity and contains information about the end-user (a _subject claim_).
2.  The _access token_ allows the app to get certain information from the user’s account on the IdP.

Both tokens are equipped with digital signatures, ensuring straightforward validation and enhancing security. Additionally, both tokens feature relatively short expiration periods, which can be refreshed, thereby diminishing susceptibility to attacks.
Registering with an OIDC provider
You need to register your app with an IdP before you can start using it for authentication. The process is provider-specific, but you may need to provide information and sign an agreement. Once the relationship has been established, you will be assigned a client ID and client secret which are required later for user authentication. Note that some providers provide separate proprietary social login solutions (e.g., “Facebook Login” or “Sign In with Google SDKs”), so be sure you are following the OIDC process specifically.
Authentication process
The following sequence of interactions occurs when the end user elects to authenticate to (login to) an app using a certain supported provider\[[4](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#CodeFlowAuth)].

1.  Request initiation: The app prepares a request for the IDP; it uses its client ID and secret to prove that it is the requesting client. This contains a _scope of access_ with the set of information the app wants from the user’s account. It then directs the user’s browser to the IdP’s login page, passing along the request.
2.  Request validation: The IdP verifies the requesting client details.
3.  Login and consent: If the user is not already logged into the IdP, they will need to do so on that login page. In the present day, they typically would do this with their [email address (or username) and password](/securebydesign/authn-using-passwords/) and perhaps with a [second authentication factor (2FA)](/securebydesign/authn-intro/#mfa-and-2fa), but login could also be via [FIDO passkeys](/securebydesign/authn-using-passkeys/) or any other [means of authentication](/securebydesign/authn-intro/#approaches-to-authn) allowed by the IdP. This step authenticates the user to the IdP. The IdP may ask the user to consent to the app’s requested scope of access.
4.  Security token creation: Assuming user authentication on the IdP succeeds and the user accepts the scope of access, the IDP generates [security tokens](#security-tokens) and an access code for retrieving those tokens.
5.  Response with authentication result: The IdP redirects the user’s browser back to the app, passing along the access code. This is a form of callback and is made to a URL provided by the app in the initial request.
6.  Token validation: The app directly calls the IdP with the access code to retrieve the security tokens, which the app validates to prevent spoofing.
7.  Post-authentication: The app can now consider the user to be authenticated or it can require additional authentication steps. It can also require new users to set up their user profiles.

At any point after this, the app can request in-scope information from the user’s account on the IdP. It provides the access token as proof of authorization.
Figure 1 depicts this visually:

There are protocol details not covered in the above overview, e.g., PCKE flows being used for mobile clients due to higher risk of code interception\[[5](https://auth0.com/docs/get-started/authentication-and-authorization-flow/authorization-code-flow-with-proof-key-for-code-exchange-pkce)]. Check references if you are going to implement OIDC yourself.
Benefits and considerations for supporting OIDC in your app
Beyond the improved user convenience and streamlined sign-up process, your app can potentially reap the following advantages when incorporating OIDC authentication with at least one provider:

- OIDC establishes a user’s identity, which allows you to provide each user with exactly the right access and permissions, safeguarding user data and reducing abuse.
- With well-chosen IdPs, you are likely to have better account security than with your own authentication implementation since the providers would have larger skilled teams working to ensure the security of the service. Further, you can reduce your liability risks for credential breaches since the IdP handles sensitive login information instead of your app.
- Once your app has support for one IdP, it is easier to add support for additional IdPs, increasing the chance of all users finding a provider they can use.
- With OIDC your app can have access to various details such as email address, profile picture, and friends from the user’s account on the IdP, provided the IdP supports that and the user consents. This can enrich the user experience or your business or mission.
- OIDC can be used to support multi-tenancy within your app, with users coming from different organizations.
- You will likely experience reduced ongoing support costs for your authentication workflow, including not needing to support, e.g., users that have forgotten passwords, yourself.
- You are using a well-paved path since OIDC is widely adopted. The effort to integrate OIDC into your app may be lowered due to available APIs and the different OIDC client libraries and SDKs that are available for popular languages and platforms.
  Consider the following factors when using OIDC for your app:
- Be sure to use an IdP that maintains a high security standard, has high availability, and is unlikely to unexpectedly cease operations.
- It is important to safeguard the security tokens for each session and your app’s issued client key and ID. Choose [storage](/securebydesign/secrets-how/) such as an online vault that will guard against unauthorized access and store these [secrets](/securebydesign/?series=secrets) in encrypted form. Limit the roles that can read them.
- Even though you are delegating the actual authentication, there is still implementation work – your app will need to implement integration with IdPs including handling redirects from the provider. OIDC is a standard though, so much of that work can be reused for different IdPs.
- As is typical with outsourcing, with social login, you will have less control, in this case over the strength of authentication. That strength will depend on what the provider allows the user to do and the user’s level of awareness and care. Providers may honor certain `acr_values` in requests such as `mfa`\[[6](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#IDToken)] but nothing inherent to the protocol ensures that IdPs will enforce it at all or in exactly the way you want.
- Your app should emit [audit logs](/securebydesign/secure-audit-logging-overview/) for at least successful and unsuccessful logins, but be sure not to disclose security tokens there or elsewhere.
- Some potential users may be wary of what will be shared from the IdP, either reasonably or due to lack of knowledge that, for example, that their password is not shared and that the app will not be able to post to their feed.
